Rosdolsky, Roman (1977) The Making of Marx's `Capital', Pluto Press.

Rosdolsky's work has been celebrated, and rightly so. However, have Marxists followed up on it?

Chapter 3, ``Karl Marx and the Problem of Use-Value in Political Economy[1]''

``Before proceeding to a presentation of the contents of the \emph{Rough Draft} we want to raise a methodological question which has been
very neglected in previous marxist literature,[2] the answer to which, however, contributes fundamentally to our knowledge of the \emph{Rough Draft}. The issue is that of the role of use-value in Marx's economics.'' (p. 73)

Obviously, one needs to be careful with the notion of Marx's ``economics,'' as Marx didn't view the study of society as fragmented as it appeared to bourgeois thought.  But neither Marx considered these division arbitrary.  They reflected or were the expression in the social consciousness of specific social conditions.  That aside, this is indeed a crucial issue.

``Among Marx's numerous critical comments on Ricardo's system the most striking can be found only in the Rough Draft, namely that Ricardo abstracts from use-value in his econoniics,[3] that he is only `exoterically concerned'[4] with this important category, and that consequently for him it `remains lying dead as a simple presupposition'.[5] We should now examine this criticism more closely. Strangely enough, it concerns not only Ricardo, but also many of Marx's pupils, as it has been a tradition among marxist economists to disregard use-value, and place it under the scope of the `knowledge of merchandise' (Warenkunde). For example, Hilferding in his reply to B\"ohm-Bawerk: 'The commodity is the unity of use-value and value, but we can regard that unity from two different aspects. As a natural thing it is the object of a natural science -- as a social thing, it is the object of a social science, political economy.'' (p. 73)

Yes!  The same can be said of Marx's Capital (though maybe not of Marx, as a lot of his thoughts remained in his head) and of Marxists misled by the sharp contrast between use value and value. And no, use value is not a natural thing. It is a social thing, though a layer of abstraction above that of a specific mode of production.

``The object of economics is the social aspect of the commodity, of the good, insofar as it is a symbol of social inter-connection. On the other hand the natural aspect of the commodity, its use-value, lies outside the domain of political economy.'[6]

Here's a German, an Austrian, but basically a German, who draws a stark contrast between use value and value, and thus discards value.  Saying that a commodity is a unity of use value and value doesn't mean we should only care about value.  We should care about how the whole sticks together, the contradiction but also the unity or identity of use value and value.  Since use value is not ``the object of economics,'' discard it, and focus on value alone.

``At first glance this appears to be simply a paraphrase of the well-known section from Marx's Contribution. However, how does this passage actually read in Marx? 

``[Rosdolsky quotes Marx:] `To be a use-value is evidently a necessary prerequisite of the commodity, but it is immaterial to the use-value whether it is a commodity. Use-value as such, since it is independent of the determinate economic form, lies outside the sphere of investigation of political economy. It belongs in this sphere only when it is itself a determinate form.'[7]'' (p. 74)

Marx is clear here.  Use value in general (the content of value but abstracted from the social relations that form it as value as a necessity), ``independent of the determinate economic form,'' is outside of political economy, because political economy splits social life and focuses only on the ``economic form'' associated with commodity production, private ownership, etc.  Value is not outside of social science though.  It is definitely not outside of the radical critique of political economy from the perspective of the direct producers.  But even in the restricted narrow focus of political economy, use value enters into the analysis ``when it is itself a determinate form,'' i.e. when we regard use value in its connection with value.

``It must be conceded that the original differs considerably from the copy,[8] and that Hilferding's arbitrary reproduction of these sentences is tantamount to umsy distortion of Marx's real view.

``Or, we can take a more recent marxist author, P. M. Sweezy. In his work the \emph{Theory of Capitalist Development}, which is intended to popularise Marx's economics, we read : `Marx excluded use-value (or as it would now be called, `utility') from the field of investigation of political economy on the ground that it does not directly embody a social relation. He enforces a strict requirement that the categories of economics must be social categories, i.e. categories which represent relations between people. It is important to realise that this is in sharp contrast to the attitude of modern economic theory...'[9] 

``Sweezy's presentation does not differ substantially from that normally found in popularisations of marxist economics.[10] However, in his case the mistake is even less forgivable, as not only did he have access to the \emph{Theories of Surplus-Value}, but also the \emph{Marginal Notes on A. Wagner},[11] where Marx discusses the role of use-value in his economic theory in great detail.

``He says there on Wagner, `Only a vir obscurus, who has not understood a word of \emph{Capital} could conclude : Because Marx dismisses all the German professional twaddle on `use-value' in general [NB, JH] in a footnote on `use-value' in the first edition of \emph{Capital} and refers the reader who would like to know something about real use-value to `manuals dealing with merchandise'[12] therefore use-value plays no role for him... If one is concerned with analysing the `Commodity', the simplest concrete economic entity, all relations which have nothing to do with the object of analysis must be kept at a distance. However, what there is to say about the commodity, as far as use-value is concerned, I have said in a few lines; but, on the other hand, I have called attention to the characteristic form in which use-value -- the product of labour[13] -- appears in this respect; namely, `A thing can be useful and the product of human labour, without being a commodity. Whoever directly satisfies his own needs with the product of his own labour creates, indeed, use-values, but not commodities. In order to produce the latter, he must not only produce use-values, but use-values for others, social use-values." [14] [As soon as use-value is not specific and concerning the individual, but use value in general, a social use value, then we are talking value.  JH] Hence use-value itself -- as the use-value of a `commodity' -- possesses a historically specific character... It would therefore be sheer wordspinning to use the opportunity provided by the analysis of the commodity -- because it presents itself as, on the one hand a use-value or good, and on the other a `value' -- to add on all kinds of banal reflections about use-values or goods which do not form part of the world of commodities [in the way that standard university economics does] ... On the other hand the vir obscurus has overlooked the fact that I do not stop short in my analysis of the commodity at the double manner in which it presents itself, but immediately go on to say that in the double being of the commodity there is represented the twofold character of labour, whose product the commodity is: useful labour, i.e. the concrete modes of labour which create use-values, and abstract labour, labour as the expenditure of labour-power, irrespective of whatever `useful' way it is expended (on which my later representation of the production process is based); that in the development of the value-form of the commodity, in the last instance of its money-form and hence of money, the value of commodity is represented in the use-value of the other, i.e. in the natural form of the other commodity ; that surplus-value itself is derived from a `specific' and exclusive use-value of labour-power, etc. etc.  That is, use-value plays a far more important part in my economics, than in economics hitherto,[15] but N.B. that it is only ever taken into account when this arises from the analysis of given economic forms, and not out of arguing backwards and forwards about the concepts of words `use-value' and `value'[16]

``This then is Marx's view. It is dear from this that the traditional marxist interpretation of Hilferding, Sweezy et al. cannot possibly be correct, and that in this instance the authors mentioned above -- without knowing it -- do not follow their teacher, Marx, but rather Ricardo, the man he criticises.'' (p. 76)

``However, what is the basis of Marx's critique, and how should we actually interpret the objections to Ricardo which are mentioned at the beginning?

``To answer this we have to go back to the basic methodological assumptions of the marxist system.  We know that, in contrast to the Classical school, Marx's entire theoretical effort was directed at uncovering the `peicular laws which govern the emergence, existence, development and death of a given social order, and its replacement by another higher one.[17]  He thus regarded the capitalist mode of production as `merely a historical mode of production, corresponding to a certain limited epoch in the development of the material conditions of production'[18] and the categories of bourgeois economics as `forms of thought expressing with social validity the conditions and relations of a definite, historically determined mode of production'.[19] 

``But how can theory arrive at a knowledge of such particular laws, which have only a historical claim to validity? And how can these laws be brought into consonance with the general economic determinants which apply to all social epochs since , 'all epochs of production have certain features in common', a fact which `arises already from the identity of the subject, humanity, with the object, nature'.[20] Consequently, nothing is easier than `to confound or extinguish all historical differences under general human laws', by picking out these common characteristics.[21] For example, `even though the most developed languages have laws and characteristics in common with the least developed, nevertheless, those things which determine their development' must express `the distinction between what they have in general and what they have in common'. Similarly the task of political economy is, above all, the investigation of the laws of development of the capitalist period, which it studies `so that in their unity' (the unity between this period with earlier ones through the features which they have in common), `the essential difference is not forgotten'.[22]

``But what constitutes development in the sphere of the economy? It is precisely that process in which it expresses its specific social character! `To the extent that the labour-process is solely a process between man and nature; its simple elements remain common to all forms of social development. However, each definite historical form of this process marks a further development in its material basis and social forms.'[23] Here it is the social forms which are the decisive factor -- as distinct from their naturally given `content'. They alone represent the active, forward-moving element,[24] for `natural laws cannot be abolished at all. What can change in historically different circumstances is only the form in which these laws assert themselves.'[25]

``We cannot go any more closely here into the fundamental marxist distinction between `Form' and `Content' in economics. (The influence of Hegel's Logic is easily discernible here.[26] One fact though is certain: for Marx it is the economic forms which serve to distinguish the particular modes of production, and in which the social relations of economic individuals are expressed. For example, as he says when critiCising Rossi: `the `forms of exchange' seem [to Rossi] to be a matter of complete indifference. This is just as if a physiologist were to say that the different forms of life are a matter of complete indifference, since they are all only forms of organic matter. It is precisely those forms that are alone of importance when the question is the specific character of a mode of social production. A coat is a coat. But have it made in the first form of exchange,[a] and you have capitalist production and modem bourgeois society; in the second,[b] and you have a form of handicraft which is even compatible with Asiatic relations or those of the Middle Ages etc.'[27] For, `in the first case the jobbing tailor produces not only a coat, he produces capital; therefore also profit; he produces his master as a capitalist and himself as a wage-labourer. When I have a coat made for me at home by a jobbing tailor for me to wear, that no more makes me my own entrepreneur (in the sense of an economic category) than it makes the entrepreneur tailor an entrepreneur when he himself wears and consumes a coat made by his workmen.'[28]

``And in another passage : `The agricultural labourers in England and Holland who receive wages which are `advanced' by capital `produce their wages themselves' just like the French peasant or the self-sustaining Russian serf. If the production process is considered in its continuity, then the capitalist advances the worker as `wages' today only a fart of the product which he produced yesterday. Thus the difference does not lie in the fact that, in one case, the worker produces his own wage, and does not produce them in the other...  The whole difference lies in the \emph{change of form}, which the labour fund produced by the worker undergoes, before it returns to him in the form of wages...'29

``Hence it is the specific social forms of production and distribution which, in Marx's view, constitute the real object of economic analysis -- and it is just this `lack of the theoretical understanding needed to distinguish the different form of economic relations' combined `with a crude obsession with the material' which characterises previous economics, even in its best representatives.[30] Only R. Jones and Sismondi are exempt from this criticism.[31])

``With this we come to the end of our methodological excursus. Meanwhile the reader will have noticed that we have simultaneously answered -- in very general terms -- the question of the role of use-value in Marx's economics. How did that passage run which we quoted at the beginning, from Marx's Contribution? In its `independence from the determinate economic form' use-value `lies outside the sphere of investigation of political economy. It belongs in this sphere only when it is a determinate form itself.' In other words, whether use-value should be granted economic significance or not can only be decided in accordance with its relation to the social relations of production. It is certainly an economic category to the extent that it influences these relations, or is itself influenced by them. However, apart from that - in its raw `natural characteristics - it fall's outside the scope of political economy. Or, as it says in the Grundrisse: `Political economy has to do with the specific social forms of wealth or rather the production of wealth. The material of wealth, whether subjective, like labour, or objective, like objects for the satisfaction of natural or historical needs, initially appears as common to all epochs of production. This material therefore appears initially as mere presupposition, lying quite outside the scope of political economy, and falls within its purview only when it is modified by the formal relations or appears as modifying them.'[32]

``Regarded in this way, the question of the difference between Marx and Ricardo on the role of use-value in economics no longer presents any difficulties. It cannot be related to their basic theories of value since both subscribed to the labour theory of value. From the standpoint of the labour theory of value the utility or use-value of the products of labour cannot be granted any influence in the creation of value; their use-value must rather appear as a simple presupposition of their exchangeability. However, it in no way follows from this that use-value has no economic significance at all, and that it should simply be excluded from the sphere of economics.

``In Marx's view this is only correct in the case of simple commodity circulation (the exchange form C-M-C). Simple circulation `consists at bottom[33] only of the formal process of positing exchange-value, sometimes in the role of the commodity, at other times in the role of money'.[34] How exactly the commodities to be exchanged were produced (i.e. whether they originated in a capitalist or pre-capitalist economy), and how they will be consumed after exchange is incidental to the economic study of simple commodity circulation. The protagonists here are simply buyers and sellers, or rather the commodities put up for sale by them, which establish their social connection on their behalf. The real aim of exchange -- the mutual satisfaction of the needs of the commodity producers -- can only be fulfilled if the `commodities simultaneously prove themselves to be values, if they are successfully exchanged for the `universal commodity', money. Consequently the social change of matter takes place in the change of form of the commodities themselves.

``And in this situation the change of form is the only social relationship between the commodity owners -- `the indicator of their social function, or their social relation to each other'.[35] However, as far as the content outside the act of exchange is concerned, this `content can only be... 1) the natural particularity of the commodity being exchanged 2) the particular natural need of the exchangers or both together, the different use-values of the commodities being exchanged'.[36] However the content as such does not determine the character of the exchange relation. In fact, use-value simply constitutes `the material basis in which a specific economic relation presents itself' and `it is only this specific relation which stamps the use-value as a commodity... Not only does the exchange-value not appear as determined by use-value, but rather, furthermore, the commodity only becomes a commodity, insofar as its owner does not relate to it as use-value.'[37] Hence in this situation, where exchange `takes place only for the reciprocal use of the commodity, the use-value... the natural [not natural, JH] peculiarity of the commodity as such, has no standing as an economic form', -- is not `a content of the relation as a social relation'.[38] Consequently only the change of form of the commodity and money has economic significance, and the presentation of simple commodity exchange has to be confined to this change of form alone.[39] However, although this is correct for simple commodity exchange, nothing would be more erroneous, states Marx, than to conclude `that the distinction between use-value and exchange-value, which falls outside the characteristic economic form in simple circulation,... falls outside it in general... For example, Ricardo, `Who believes that the bourgeois economy deals only with exchange-value, and is concerned with use-value merely exoterically, derives the most important determinations of exchange-value precisely from use-value, from the relation between the two of them: for instance, ground-rent, the minimum level of wages, and the distinction between fixed and circulating capital, to which he imputes precisely the most significant influence on the determination of prices; likewise in the relation of demand and supply etc.'[40] Ricardo was indeed right to say that `exchange-value is the predominant aspect. But of course use does not come to a halt because it is determined only by exchange; although of course it obtains its direction thereby'.[41] `To use is to consume, whether for production or consumption. Exchange is the mediation of this act through a social process. Use can be posited' through exchange `and be a mere consequence of exchange; then again exchange can appear merely as a moment of use, etc. From the standpoint of capital (in circulation), exchange appears as the positing of use-value, while on the other hand its use (in the act of production) appears as positing for exchange, as positing its exchange-value. Similarly with production and consumption. In the bourgeois economy (as in any) they are posited in specific distinctions and specific unities. The point is to understand precisely these specific distinguishing characteristics... and not, as Ricardo does, to completely abstract from them, or like the dull Say, to make a pompous fuss about nothing more than the presupposition of the word `utility'.' For `Use-value itself plays a role as an economic category.


Where it plays this role . . . the degree to which use-value exists
outside economics and its determinate forms and not merely as presupposed
matter . . . is something which emerges from the development
itsel£.'42
IV.
So when, according to Marx, does use-value as such become \
modified by the formal relations of bourgeois economy, and when,
in its turn, does it intervene to modify these formal relations - that
is, as a 'determinate economic form' itself?
In the Marginal Notes on A.Wagner, which have already been
cited, Marx points out that even in simple commodity circulation,
with the development of the money-form of the commodity, the value
of a commodity must be represented in 'use-value, i.e. in the natural
form of the other commodity'. In Marx's view this does not only
mean that money must be a commodity as a matter of course, i.e.
possess use-value in its material, but also, that this use-value is connected
to quite specific physical properties of the money-commodity
which make it capable of fulfilling its function. We read in the
Rough Draft : 'The study of the precious metals as subjects of the
money relation, as incarnations of the latter, is therefore by no means
a matter lying outside the realm of political economy, as Proudhon
believes, any more than the physical composition of paint, and of
marble lie outside the realm of painting and sculpture. The attributes
possessed by the commodity as exchange-value, attributes for
which its natural qualities are not adequate, express the demands
made upon those commodities which are the material of money par
excellence. These demands at the level at which we have confined
ourselves up until now [i.e. the level of pure circulation of metals)
are most completely satisfied by the precious metals.'43 g h" 􀊏:" , The commodities which fulfil the function of the universal
equivalent, can double their use-value precisely because of their
specific attributes, which make them the only material for money.
They contain 'besides their particular use-value as a particular commodity',
a 'universal' or 'formal' use-value.44 'This latter use-value is
itself a characteristic form, i.e. it arises from the specific role, which
it [the money-commodity] plays as a result of the all-sided action
exerted on it by the other commodities in the process of exchange.'45
42 ibid. pp.646, 267.
43 ibid. p. I 7 4•
44 'The formal use-value [of money] unrelated to any real individual
need.' (Contribution, p.8g.)
45 Contribution, P·47·
84 • The Making of Marx's 'Capital'
With this, the 'material change and the change of form coincide,
since in money the content itself is part of the characteristic economic
form.'46
The second example which Marx refers to in the MarginarNotes
is of decisive importance - the exchange between capital and labour.
If we look, for example, at simple commodity circulation, as it occurs
'on the surface of the bourgeois world', in retail trade, 'a worker who
buys a loaf of bread, and a millionaire who buys the same thing, seem,
in this act, to be simply buyers, as the grocer who confronts them is
simply a seller. The content of these purchases, like their extent, here
appears as completely irrelevant compared with the formal aspect.'47
However the matter looks quite different if we proceed from this
exchange on the surface, to the exchange which determines the
essence of the capitalist mode of production - that between capital
and labour. For, if in simple circulation, 'commodity A is exchanged
for money B, and the latter then for the commodity C, which is destined
for consumption - the original object of the exchange for A -
then the use of commodity C, its consumption, falls entirely outside
circulation ; is irrelevant to the form of the relation . . . is of purely
physical interest, expressing no more than the relation of the individual
in his natural quality to an object of his individual need.
What he does with commodity C is a question which belongs outside
the economic relation.'48 In contrast to this, in the exchange between
capital and labour, it is precisely the use-value of the commodity
purchased by the capitalist (i.e. labour-power) which constitutes the
presupposition of the capitalist production process and the capital
relation itself. In this transaction the capitalist exchanges a commodity
whose consumption 'coincides directly with the objectification
(Vergegenstandlichung) of labour i.e. with the positing of
exchange-value'.49 Consequently, if 'the content of use-value was
irrelevant in simple circulation' here, by contrast, 'the use-value of
that which is exchanged for money appears as a particular economic
relation . . . falls within the economic process because the use-value
here is itself determined by exchange-value'.50
Hence if the creation of surplus-value, as the increase in the
exchange-value of capital, is derived from the specific use-value of
the commodity labour-power, then political economy must in turn
46 Grundrisse, p.667.
47 ibid. p.25 I .
4 8 ibid. p.274·
<9 Grundrisse, German edn. P·944·
50 Grundrisse, pp.274-75, 3 I 1 .
T
r
The problem of use-value • 85
1 · restrict the share of the value-product accruing to the worker to the
equivalent of the goods necessary to maintain him, and consequently
must allow this share to be determined at bottom by means of usevalue.
51 In this instance, too, the category of use-value has an impact
on the economic relations of the capitalist mode of production.
We can also confirm now use-value constantly influences the
forms of economic relations in the circulation process of capital. We
disregard here the many ways in which the material nature of the
product affects the duration of the working period and the circulation
period, 52 and proceed directly to the distinction which is basic to the
circulation process - that between fixed and circulating capital,
which Marx refers to in his polemic against Ricardo, which we have
already cited.
As far as fixed capital is concerned, it only circulates 'as value
to the degree that it is used up or consumed as use-value in the production
process. But the time in which it is consumed and in which
it must be reproduced in its form as use-value depends on its relative
durability. Hence its durability, or its greater or lesser perishability -
the greater or smaller amount of time during which it can continue
to perform its function within the repeated production processes of
capital - this aspect of its use-value here becomes a form-determining
moment i.e. a determinant for capital as regards its form, not as
regards its substance. The necessary reproduction of fixed capital,
together with the proportion of the total capital consisting of it, here
modify, therefore, the turnover time of the total capital and thereby
its valorisation.'53
Thus, in the categories of fixed and circulating capital, 'the
distinction between the [three} elements [of the labour process] as
use-values . . . appears as a qualitative distinction within capital
itself, and as the determinant of the complete movement (turnover).'
54 This therefore represents yet another instance where usevalue
enters into the process of capital as an economic factor.55
51 'Ricardo regards the product of labour in respect of the worker only
as use-value - only the part of the product which he needs to be able to live as
a worker. But how it comes about that the worker suddenly only represents
use-value in the exchange, or only draws use-value from the exchange is by no
means clear to him.' (ibid. p.s s r .)
52 Cf. especially Chapters V, XII and XII I of Capital II.
53 Grundrisse, p.68s. Cf. Capital II, pp. I 70-7 I. 54 Grundrisse, p.6g2.
55 In this regard we should refer to the instruments of labour which, 'as
capital united with the land', function in the form of factory buildings, railways,
bridges, tunnels, docks etc. The fact that such instruments of labour are
'localised, attached to the soil by their roots, assigns to this portion of fixed
i
86 • The Making of Marx's 'Capital'
However, the role of use-value is seen most clearly in the reproduction
process of aggregate social capital, as it is presented in Part
III of Volume II of Capital. At the beginning of this section Mar􀌺
points o�􀅒 long as the analysis was simply one of the reproduction
process of an individual capital (i.e. as in Volume I), 'the
natural form of the commodity-product was completely irrelevant
to the analysis . . . whether it consisted of machines, corn or mirrors' .
In Volume I it was simply 'presupposed on the one hand that the
capitalist sells the product at its value, and on the other that he finds
within the sphere of circulation the objective means of production for
restarting the process' . For, 'the only act within the sphere of circulation
on which we have dwelt was the purchase and sale of labourpower
as the fundamental condition of capitalist production' .56 However,
'This merely formal57 manner of presentation is no longer
adequate in the study of the aggregate social capital', in the reproduction
of which the problem is not merely the replacement of value,
but also the replacement of material, and consequently everything
depends on the material shape, on the use-value of the valueproduct.
58
The same point is made in the Theories, the difference being
that Marx expressly refers to the significance of use-value as an economic
category : 'In considering surplus-value as such, the original
form of the product, hence of the surplus-product, is of no consequence.
It becomes important when we consider the actual process
of reproduction, partly in order to understand its forms, and partly
in order to grasp the influence of luxury production etc. on reproduction.'
59 'Here', Marx stresses, 'is another example of how usevalue
as such acquires economic significance.'60
capital a peculiar role in the economy of nations. They cannot be sent abroad,
cannot circulate as commodities in the world market. Title to this fixed capital
may change, it may be bought and sold, and to this extent may circulate
ideally. These titles of ownership may even circulate in foreign markets, for
instance, in the form of stocks. But a change of the persons owning this class
of fixed capital does not alter the relation of the immovable, materially fixed
part of the national wealth to its movable part.' (Capital II, p. 1 66.) 56 ibid. PP·356-57.
57 i.e. bearing in mind the form of the process.
58 Capital II, p.gg8. The well-known schemes of reproduction of TuganBaranovsky
and Otto Bauer suffer precisely from not having observed this
methodological postulate.
59 Capital II, p.407.
60 Theories III, pp.25 I -!) 2 . In another passage in the same work Marx
examines the question as to whether 'a part of the surplus-value can be directly
transformed into constant capital . . . without first having been alienated'.
He writes : 'In industrial areas there are machine-builders who build whole
The problem of use-value • 87
We now proceed to those subjects dealt with in Volume III of
capital. We can also find numerous examples here of the signiflcance
of use-value as an economic category. This is obvious in the case of
ground-rent, which Marx (like Ricardo) derives ultimately 'from the
relation of exchange-value to use-value'. The importance of usevalue
is also shown in relation to the rate of profit, insofar as this is
dependent on fluctuations in the value of raw materials. For, 'it is
especially agricultural produce proper, i.e. the raw materials taken
from organic nature, which . . . is subject to fluctuations of value in
consequence of changing yields etc. Owing to uncontrollable natural
conditions, favourable or unfavourable seasons etc. the same quantity
of labour may be represented in very different quantities of usevalues,
and a definite quantity of these use-values may therefore have
very different prices.'61 Such variations in price, 'always affect the
rate of profit, even if they leave the wage untouched and hence the
rate and amount of surplus-value too'.62 We should also devote special
attention to the influence of use-value on the accumulation of capital.
Grossmann writes : 'In marxist literature up till now stress has
been laid merely on the fact that the mass of the value of the
constant capital grows both absolutely, and in relation to the variable
capital in the course of capitalist production and the accumulation
of capital, with the increase in the productivity of labour, and the
transition to a higher organic composition of capital. However this
phenomenon only constitutes one side of the process of accumulafactories
for the manufacturers. Let us assume one-tenth is surplus-product,
unpaid labour, whether this tenth, the surplus-product, consists of factory
buildings which are built for a third party and are sold to them, or of factory
buildings which the producer builds for himself - sells to himself - clearly
makes no difference. The only thing that matters here is whether the kind of
use-value in which the surplus labour is expressed can re-enter as means of
production into the sphere of production of the capitalist to whom the surplus
belongs. This is yet another example of how important is the analysis of usevalue
for the determination of economic phenomena.' (Theories II, pp.488-8g.)
61 Capital III, pp. I I 7- I 8.
62 ibid. p. I I 5· Another example is provided by the uneven development
of the different spheres of production in the capitalist economy. We read in
Volume III : 'The fact that the development of productivity in different lines
of industry proceeds at substantially different rates and frequently even in
opposite directions, is not due merely to the anarchy of competition and the
peculiarities of the bourgeois mode of production. Productivity of labour is
also bound up with natural conditions, which frequently become less productive
as productivity grows - inasmuch as the latter depends on social conditions.
Hence the opposite movements in these different spheres - progress
here, retrogression there. Consider only the influence of the seasons, for instance,
which determines the available quantity of the bulk of raw materials,
the exhaustion of forest lands, coal and iron mines etc.' (ibid. p.26o.)
88 • The Making of MarxJs 'Capital' I tion, in that it is regarded from the aspect of value. In fact, it cannot 1
be repeated too often that the reproduction process is not merely a
process of valorisation but also a labour process - it produces not
merely values, but also use-values'. And, 'looked at from the aspect
of use-value, the increase in productive capacity does not only operate
in the direction of the devaluation of existing capital, but also in
the direction of a quantitative increase in objects of use.'63 The effect
that this has on the accumulation of capital can be read in Volume
III of Capital.64
It states there : 'The increase in productive power can only
directly increase the value of the existing capital, if by raising the rate
of profit it increases that portion of the value of the annual product
which is reconverted into capital . . . Indirectly however, the development
of the productivity of labour contributes to the increase of the
value of existing capital by increasing the mass and variety of usevalues65
in which the same exchange-value is represented and which
form the material substance i.e. the material elements of capital, the
material objects making up the constant capital directly and the
variable capital at least indirectly. More products which may be
converted into capital, whatever their exchange-value, are created
with the same capital and the same labour. These products may
serve to absorb additional labour, hence also additional cSurplus v-
labour and therefore create additional capital.' For 'the amount of
labour which a capital can command does not depend on its value,
but on the mass of raw and auxiliary materials, machinery and
elements of fixed capital and necessities of life, all of which it comprises
whatever their value may be. As the mass of labour employed
and that of surplus labour increases, there is also a growth in the
value of the reproduced capital and in the surplus-value newly
added to it.'66
v.
The problem of supply and demand is dealt with in particular
detail in Volume III of Capital. This problem is closely related to
63 Grossmann, Das Akkumulations- und Zusammenbruchsgesetz des
kapitalistischen Systems, pp.326-28.
64 Cf. in addition Capital I, pp.752-53 (604-05).
65 'If one has more elements of production (even of the same value) the
technical level of production can be expanded ; then, at the same mass of value
of capital more workers can be employed in the production process, who,
will therefore produce more value in the next cycle of production.' (Grossmann,
op. cit. p.330.)
66 Capital III, p.248.
r
The problem of use-value • 8g
that of the much discussed question of socially necessary labour-􀎧ime,
which has already been broached in Chapter 2 above.67
Right at the beginning of Volume I we read, 'Socially necessary
labour-time is the labour-time required to produce-any use-value
under the conditions of production normal for a given society and
with the average degree of skill and intensity prevalent in that
society.' And, that 'which determines the magnitude of the value of
any article is therefore the amount of labour socially necessary
or the labour-time socially necessary for its production' .68
We encounter this 'technological' meaning of the concept of
socially necessary labour-time again and again in Capital, and in }!
other of Marx's works. However, we also encounter another meaning, 11
according to which labour can only count as 'socially necessary' if
it corresponds to the aggregate requirements of society, for a par- J
ticular use-value.
In Volume I of Capital we read, 'Let us suppose that every piece
of linen in the market contains nothing but socially necessary labour􀎨
time. In spite of all this all these pieces taken as a whole may contain
superfluously expended labour-time. If the market cannot stomach
the whole quantity at the normal price of 2 shillings a yard this
proves that too great a portion of the total social labour-time has been
expended in the form of weaving. The effect is the same as if each
individual weaver had expended more labour-time upon his particular
product than was socially necessary. As the German proverb
has it : caught together, hanged together. All the linen on the market
counts as one single article of commerce, and each piece of linen is
only an aliquot part of it. And in fact the value of each sirigle yard
is also nothing but the materialisation of the same socially determined
quantity of homogeneous human labour.'69
Marx expresses the same idea in numerous other passages. And
Engels even combined both meanings in one definition when he
stated in the course of an attack on Rodbertus, 'If he had investigated
by what means and how labour creates value and therefore also
determines and measures it, he would have arrived at socially necessary
labour, necessary for the single product, both in relation to other
products of the same kind, and also in relation to society's total
demand.'70
The amalgamation of these two meanings of 'socially necessary
67 Cf. P·5 I. 68 Capital I , p. 1 29 (39).
69 ibid. p.I!OI! (I 07).
10 Engels's Preface to Marx's Poverty of Philosophy, p.20.
go · The Making of Marx>s 'Capital'
labour' has been seen as an intolerable contradiction by numerous
writers. 71 In reality the contradiction is only apparent; it is in fact a
question of different levels of analysis, which require operating with
two different, but mutually complementary concepts.
Volume III of Capital states on this : 'To say that a commodity
has a use-value is merely to say that it satisfies some social need. So
long as we dealt with individual commodities only, we could assume
that there was a need for a particular commodity - its quantity
already implied by its price - without inquiring further into the
amount of the need which has to be satisfied. This quantity is, however,
of essential importance, as soon as the product of an entire
branch of production is placed on one side, and the social need for it
on the other. It then becomes necessary to consider the extent i.e. the
amount of this social need.'72
In other words : The analysis so far has proceeded from a series
of simplifying assumptions. First it was assumed that commodities
are exchanged at their values, and second, that they always find a
buyer. Only in this way was it possible to outline the production and
circulation process of capital in pure form, without the influence
of disturbing 'accompanying circumstances'. Now is the time, c!}owever,
to bring into the economic analysis the moment of supply and
demand which has so far been neglected, but which must at last be
given its due.
As far as supply is concerned, this means, in the first instance,
that instead of one individual commodity (or the amount of commodities
produced by a single capitalist), we now have to posit the
aggregate product of an entire branch of production. For the individual
commodity the determination of socially necessary labour-time
proceeds from the fact that 'the individual value of the commodity
(and what amounts to the same under the present assumption, its
selling price) should coincide with its social value'. 73 However, the
matter is quite different when it is a question of the aggregate product
of a branch of production. Here the requirement of socially necessary
labour-time can only apply for the entire mass of commodities ; and
so consequently the individual value of commodities has to be distinguished
from their social value. Social value assumes the form of
71 See the review of the relevant literature in the instructive study by
T.Grigorovici. Die Wertlehre bei Marx und Lassalle. Beitrag zur Geschichte
eines wissenschaftlichen Misverstiindnisses 1 908. Cf., also Diehl's Sozialwissenschaftliche
Erliiuterungen zu D.Ricardos Grundgesetzen, I, 1 905, pp. 125- 28.
12 Capital III, p. 1 85 . The same line of thought can also be found in the
Rough Draft pp.404-05.
73 Capital III, p. 1 82 .
The problem of use-value • 9 1
market value, which represents the average value of the sum of commodities,
from which, consequently, the individual values of some
commodities must always diverge : they must either stand above or
below the stated market value.
This is because we can generally distinguish three categories of
producers in each branch of production : producers who produce
under above-average, average, or below-average conditions. 'Which
of the categories has a decisive effect on the average value, will in
particular depend on the numerical ratio or the proportional size of
the categories.'47 As a rule this will be the average category. In this
case that part of the total amount of commodities produced under
the poorer conditions will have to be sold off below their individual
value, whereas the commodities produced under the above average
can secure an extra amount of profit. However, it may be the case
that either the class producing under the better conditions, or that
under the worse conditions will predominate. In the first instance
the commodities produced under the better conditions will determine
the market value ; in the second instance, those produced under the
poorer conditions.
The determination of market value appears in this way if we
look exclusively at the mass of commodities thrown on to the market,
ignoring the possibility of an imbalance between supply and demand.
Hence, 'provided that the demand is large enough . . . to absorb the
whole mass of the commodities at the values which have been fixed
[by competition among the buyers] . . . the commodity will still be
sold at its market value, no matter which of the three abovementioned
cases regulates that market value. The mass of commodities
not only satisfies a need but satisfies it to its full social extent.'75
However, we know that in the capitalist mode of production, 'there
exists an accidental rather than a necessary connection between the
total amount of social labour applied to a social article . . . on the one
hand, and the extent of the demands made by the society for the
satisfaction of the need gratified by the article in question, on the
other. Every individual article, or every definite quantity of a commodity
may, indeed, contain no more than the social labour required
for its production, and from this point of view the market value of
this entire commodity represents only necessary labour, but if this
commodity has been produced in excess of the existing social needs,
then so much of the social labour-time is squandered and the mass
of the commodity comes to represent a much smaller quantity of
74 Theories II, p.lZ04.
75 Capital III, p. 1 85.
92 • The Making of Marx's 'Capital'
social labour in the market than is actually incorporated in it . . . the
reverse applies if the quantity of social labour employed in the production
of a certain kind of commodity is too small to meet the social
need for that commodity.'76
In both cases the 'determination of market value which we
[previously] outlined abstractly' is modified, in the sense that 'if the
supply is too small, the market value is always regulated by the commodities
produced under the least favourable circumstances and if
the supply is too large, always by the commodities produced under
the most favourable conditions; that therefore it is one of the extremes
which determines the market value, in spite of the fact that if we
proceed only from the relation between the amounts of the commodity
produced under different conditions, a different result should
obtain.'77
So it can be seen that which of the categories (of producers)
determines market value depends not only on their proportional
strength, but also, in a certain sense, on the relation of supply and
demand. But doesn't this completely invalidate Marx's theory of
value ? Not at all. This would only be true if each time demand outweighed
supply, or vice versa, this led to a proportional increase or
fall in market value itself. However, in this case the market value
would be identical with market price, or it would - as Marx expressed
it - 'have to stand higher than itself'. 78 For, according to Marx's conception,
market value can only move within the limits set by the
conditions of production (and consequently by the individual value)
of one of the three categories.
We read in the section of the Theories devoted to ground-rent
that : 'A difference between market value and individual value arises
in general not because products are sold absolutely above their value,
but only because the value of the individual product may be different
from the value of the product of a whole sphere . . . The difference
between the market value and the individual value of a product
can therefore only be due to the fact that the definite quantities of
labour with which different parts of the total product are manufactured
have different degrees of productivity. It can never be due
to the value being determined irrespective of the quantity of labour
altogether employed in this sphere.'79
Thus, if as a consequence of the market situation, the mass of
76 ibid. p. 1 87.
77 ibid. p. 1 8s.
78 Theories II, p.2 7 1 .
7 9 ibid. PP-270-7 I .
f The problem of use-value • 93
commodities is sold above the individual value of the commodities
produced under the worst conditions, or alternatively below the individual
value of those produced under the best conditions, the market
price would indeed diverge from the market value.80 This regulation
of the occasional fluctuations of market price is, of course, the main
function allotted to the relation of supply and demand in the system
of bourgeois economics.
It is evident that our interpretation of Marx's theory of market
value diverges very considerably from that normally presented in
marxist literature. The following passage by Grigorovici could serve
as an example. ' "If the demand is large enough to absorb commodities
at their market value", says Marx, "this commodity will be sold
at its market value, no matter which of the three aforementioned
cases regulates it. This mass of commodities does not merely satisfy
a need, but satisfies it to its full social extent. Should their quantity
be smaller or greater, however, than the demand for them, the market
price will diverge from the market value", i.e. the market price will
exceed or fall below the market value; market price and market value
will not coincide.' The author concludes, 'Thus, what affects the relation
of supply and demand, or in other words the demand-moment
is not a change in market value, but simply a divergence of market
price from the market value of the commodity, although in both the
first and second cases it seems as if the market value itself has
changed, as a result of the change in the relation of supply and
demand; because in the first case the commodity produced under the
poorer conditions seems to regulate market value, and in the second
the commodity produced under the better.'81
This then is Grigorovici's view. However, what does the passage
from Volume III, which we have already cited in part, actually say
on this point ?
'Should demand for this mass now also remain the same, this
commodity will be sold at its market value, no matter which of the
three aforementioned cases regulates this market value . . . Should
their quantity be smaller or greater, however, than the demand for
them, there will be divergencies between the market price and the
market value. And the first divergence is that if the supply is too
small, the market value is always regulated by the commodities produced
under the least favourable circumstances, and, if the supply
80 Cf. ibid. p.268. 'This market value itself can never be greater than the
value of the product of the least fertile class' (the coal-mine). 'If it were higher
this would only show that the market price stood above the market value. But
the market value must represent real value.'
81 Grigorovici, op. cit. P·37·
94 • The Making of Marx's 'Capital'
is too large, always by the cormnodities produced under the most
favourable conditions ; that therefore it is one of the extremes which
determines the market value, in spite of the fact that if we proceed
only from the relation between the amounts of the commodity produced
under different conditions, a different result should obtain.'82
. --􀎩he formulation is not at all clear, and consequently can give
rise to uncertainties. However, Marx expresses himself more precisely
on p. 1 79 of Volume III. He writes : 'At a certain price, a commodity
occupies just so much place on the market. This place remains
the same in case of a price change only if the higher price is accompanied
by a drop in the supply of the commodity, and a lower price
, by an increase of supply. And if •he demand is so great that it does j not contract when the price is regulated by the value of cormnodities
l produced under the least favourable conditions, then these determine
j the market value. This is only possible if demand is greater than l usual, or if supply drops below the usual level. Finally, if the mass
\ of the commodities produced exceeds the quantity disposed of at
\ average market values, the commodities produced under the most
\favourable conditions r.egulate the market value.'
􀊎 We in no way want to deny that there are passages in Marx
which seem to prove the opposite of what has just been said. 83 What
is important, however, is not to 'explain' these unclarities away on
the basis of a falsely conceived marxist orthodoxy, but rather to
understand and interpret the true meaning of Marx's explanations
in terms of their 'inner logic'. And we consider that our interpretation
of the passages on market value corresponds better with Marx's
theory as a whole, in particular with his theory of ground-rent, than
the interpretations which are to be found in Grigorovici and others.
However, this is not the place to go into this special problem in
detail. Our point was only to show that Marx, in strictly logical
fashion, deals with the problem of 'socially necessary labour-time' on
two different levels, and that his aim in doing this was to place the
moment of social demand, i.e. use-value, in its true light.
' In another passage in Volume III we read : 'It continues to be
)a necessary requirement that the commodity represent use-value.
· But if the use-value of individual commodities depends on whether
. they themselves satisfy a particular need, then the use-value of the
,mass of the ,sQcial product depends onAe_th􀎪r it satisfies the quant!!
atively det�TII!int;d social nee.d for each particular kind of product
82 Capital III, p. 185.
83 It should not be forgotten, as Engels remarked, that the manuscript
for Volume III only represents a 'first extremely incomplete draft'.
1 The problem of use-value • 95
in an adequate manner, and whether the labour is therefore proportionately
distributed among the different spheres in keeping with
these social needs, which are quantitatively circumscribed . . . . The
social need, that is the use-value on a social scale, appears here as a
determining factor for the amount of total social labour-time which
is expended in various specific spheres of production. But it is merely
the same law which is already applied in the case of single commodities,
namely that the use-value of a commodity is the basis of its
exchange-value and thus of its value . . . This quantitative limit to
the quota of social labour-time available for the various spheres of
production is but a more developed expression of the law of value
'in general, although the necessary labour-time assumes a different
. meaning here. QE!yjust so much of it is necessary f9r the satisfaction
.; of social needs. It is use-value which brings about this limitation.'84
And so we can see again how use-value operates as such in the
:relations of the bourgeois economy, which is based on exchange-value,
,' and consequently how it becomes an economic category itself.
With this last example, we come to the end of our analysis.
Future research into Marx will decide whether the extracts. which
we have cited from the Rough Draft prove us correct, and actually
lead to a partial revision of previous interpretations of Marx's
economic theory, as we believe they must. We can, however,
allow ourselves one final remark ; that it was clearly Marx's own
unique method of analysis which enabled him to elaborate his opposition
to Ricardo in such an original and logical fashion. Engels was
surely right when he perceived in Marx's treatment of use-value,
and its role in political economy, a classic example of the use of the
'German dialectical method'. 85
84 Capital III, pp.6gs-g6. Cf. Theories I, p.204.
85 See his review of Marx's Contribution ( 1 859) in MEW Vol. I g, p-476.







Footnotes:
[1] Originally published in the Swiss journal \emph{Kyklos}, 1959·
[2] We can name two works which constitute an exception: first, the work of the Russian economist I. I. Rubin on Marx's Theory of Production and Consumption of 1930, which was unfortunately unavailable to the author; second (at least in part) Grossmann's last work \emph{Marx, die klassische Nationalokonomie und das Problem der Dynamik}, (mimeographed) New York.
[3] Grundrisse, p.267 .
[4] ibid. p.647·
[5] ibid. p.320.
[6] R.Hilferding, Bohm-Bawerk's Criticism of Marx, Clifton NJ : Kelley, 1949, p. 1 go.
[7] Contribution, p.28.
[8] Bernstein noticed this immediately and chafes Hilferding in his discussion of the latter's text (in Dokumenten des Sozialismus 1904 Heft 4, pp. 1 54-57) on the subject of the discrepancy between his formulation of the question and Marx's own. He writes, `Marx is not so daring as to throw use-value completely out of political economy', and if Hilferding does this, `then he stumbles from his lofty position as an interpreter of Marx into depths far below those of the university professors whom he holds in such low regard'. However, these sarcastic remarks do not obscure the fact that Bernstein himself had no idea how to deal with the discrepancy, and was only able to solve it through a convergence of Marx's theory with the economists of the `psychological school'.

[Grr.  The association with Bernstein and the `psychological school' is sure to push the buttons of Marxists.]

Hilferding's reply turned out to be very weak. `Use-value can only be designated a social category when it is a conscious aim of society, when it has become an object of its conscious social action. It becomes this in a socialist society, whose conscious management sets as its aim the production of use-values; however, this is in no way the case in capitalist society... However, although use-value can be designated as a social category in a socialist society it is not an economic category, not an object of theoretical economic analysis, since a consciously directed relation of production does require this analysis [i.e. the analysis of use value, JH].' (\emph{Neue Zeit}, No.4, 1904, pp. 110-11.)

[9] op. cit. p.26.
[10] The philosopher Marcuse goes to the other extreme when he writes, `when Marx declares that use-value lies outside the scope of economic theory, he is at first describing the actual state of affairs in classical political economy. His own analysis begins by accepting and explaining the fact, that, in capitalisms, use-values appear only as the `material bearers of exchange-value' (Capital I, p. 126(36)). His critique then refutes the capitalist treatment of use-values and sets its goals on an economy in which this relation is entirely abolished.' (Reason and Revolution, p.304.)

The arbitrariness of this interpretation is immediately obvious. In the first place the passage quoted from the Contribution is not concerned exclusively with classical political economy, but with political economy in general [What is that? JH]. Secondly, Marx nowhere states that use-values are only `material depositories of exchange-value', but rather that they are so `at the same time', which is quite another question. Finally, Marx never set himself the task of combatting the capitalist treatment of use-values, but rather of scientifically explaining the fact, peculiar to capitalism (and to commodity production in general), that for use-values to be able to satisfy human needs, they must first prove themselves as exchange-values.

[Actually, Marx did concern himself with fighting the ``capitalist treatment of use-values,'' the fact that use value, human need, human powers, are all subordinated to capital, self-expanding value.  Marx's Capital is about fighting those social conditions.  So Marcuse may be clumsy in his wording, but he has a point.]

[11] Marx's last economic work, printed in MEW Vol. r g, PP·35s-8g. An English translation was published in Theoretical Practice, Issue 5, spring 1972.
[12] See Contribution, p.28.
[13] This should read, `insofar as it is the product of labour'.
[14] Quoted from Capital I, p. 131(40).
[15] Marx refers here, of course, to the economics of Smith and Ricardo.
[16] MEW Vol. 19, p· 371.
[17] Kaufmann's description of Marx's method of investigation -- quoted by Marx in the Afterword to the Second Edition of Volume I of Capital, p. 102 (19).
[18] Capital, III, p. 259. 
[19] Capital, I, p. 169 (76).
[20] Grundrisse, p.85. Hence, `no society can go on producing, in other words, no society can reproduce, unless it constantly reconverts a part of its products into means of production, or elements of fresh products'. (Capital I, p. 711 (566). For this purpose, therefore, it must maintain a certain production [proportion? JH] between the growth of the industries producing the means of production, and those producing the means of consumption (Departments I and II in Marx's schemes of reproduction), accumulate reserves etc. On the other hand, in any society, a certain quantity of surplus labour has to be carried out by the members of that society in order that it may have `at its disposal, so to speak, a fund for development, which the very increase in population makes necessary' (Theories I, p.1 07). `If we strip both wages and surplus-value, both necessary and surplus labour of their specifically capitalist character, then certainly there remain not these forms, but merely their rudiments, which are common to all social modes of production.' (Capital III, p.876.) And finally, `No society can prevent the disposable labour-time of society one way or another from regulating production.' (MEW Vol.32, p. 1 2.) And consequently this material basis of the determination of value [NB: material basis of the determination of value. JH] will also have considerable significance under socialism. (Cf. Capital III, p,85 1 .)
[21] Grundrisse, p.87.
[22] ibid. p.85.
[23] Capital III, p.88g.
[24] Cf. Hegel' s Science of Logic, Volume II, p· 79· `Matter is determined as indifferent: it is the passive as against the active... Matter must be formed and Form must materialise itself -- must in Matter give itself self-identity and persistence.'
[25] Marx's letter to Kugelmann, 11 July I868. Selected Correspondence, p. 186.
[26] The Russian political economist I.I.Rubin wrote in another context: `One cannot forget that, on the question of the relation between content and form, Marx took the standpoint of Hegel and not of Kant. Kant treated form as something external in relation to the content, and as something which adheres to the content from the outside. From the standpoint of Hegel's philosophy, the content is not in itself something to which form adheres from the outside. Rather, through its development, the content itself gives birth to the form which was already latent in the content. Form necessarily grows from the content itself.' (Essays on Marx's Theory of Value, Detroit : Black and Red 1971, p.I I7.)
[27] Marx's comments here refer to the following sentence from Rossi: `Whether one buys ready-made clothes from a tailor, or whether one gets them from a jobbing-tailor who has been given the material and a wage, as far as the results are concerned the two actions are perfectly similar.' (Theories I, p.285.)
[a] The form in which the tailor produces the coat for sale ready-made. 
[b] The form in which the tailor is provided with the material and a wage by the person who wants the coat.
[28] Theories I, pp. 295-96.
[29] Theories III, p.424. (Cf. Grundrisse, p. 87.)
[30] Theories I, p. 92 and Capital I, p. 682 (542); Capital III, p. 323.
[31] `What distinguishes Jones from the other economists (except perhaps Sismondi) is that he emphasises that the essential feature of capital is its socially determined form, and that he reduces the whole difference between the capitalist and other modes of production to this distinct form.' (Theories III, p.424.)
[32] Grundrisse, p.852. Cf. the parallel section on p. 881 . `The first category in which bourgeois wealth presents itself is that of the commodity. The commodity itself appears as the unity of two aspects. It is use-value, i.e. object of the satisfaction of any system whatever of human needs. This is its material side, which the most disparate epochs of production may have in common, and whose examination therefore lies beyond political economy. Use-value falls within the realm of political economy as soon as it becomes modified by the modern relations of production, or as it in turn intervenes to modify them.'
[33] In original, 'au fond'.
[34] Grundrisse, p.256.
[35] ibid. p.24 1 .
[36] ibid. p.242.
[37] ibid. p.88 1 .
[38] ibid. p.267.
[39] 'If we want to examine the social relation of individuals within their
economic process, we must keep to the characteristic form of this process
itself.' (Grundrisse, German edn. p.g 1 4.)
[40] Grundrisse, pp.646-47.
[41] ibid. p.267.


