References:
https://github.com/jhuato/postwar_global_capitalism/blob/master/hilferding%20value%20utility%20marx%20method%20bohm%20bawerk%20subjective
https://github.com/jhuato/postwar_global_capitalism/blob/master/marx%20contribution%20use%20value%20utility
https://github.com/jhuato/postwar_global_capitalism/blob/master/Usevalue_value_labor%20time

---
Cases where use value matters:

1. Value since the value of a commodity is inversely proportional to productivity of concrete, use-value producing labor!
2. Money: a use value embodies value in general.  Value takes the form of use value (gold, etc.).
3. Labor power as a commodity.  Its use value is labor itself, which is what produces value.
4. Fixed capital vs. circulating capital.  How long it lasts as a productive use value, the kind of means of production.

In Capital, volume I, Marx wrote:

``The utility of a thing makes it a use value.1 But this utility is not a thing of air. Being limited by the physical properties of the commodity, it has no existence apart from that commodity. A commodity, such as iron, corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so far as it is a material thing, a use value, something useful. This property of a commodity is independent of the amount of labour required to appropriate its useful qualities. When treating of use value, we always assume to be dealing with definite quantities, such as dozens of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. The use values of commodities furnish the material for a special study, that of the commercial knowledge of commodities.2 Use values become a reality only by use or consumption: they also constitute the substance of all wealth, whatever may be the social form ofthat wealth. In the form of society we are about to consider, they are, in addition, the material depositories of exchange value.'' (p. 46)

Note that the utility of a thing is not the thing.  The thing itself is all physics, abstraction made of humanity.  The utility of a thing is a relation between a physical object and a human or group of humans in a given, concrete, historically determined social setting.  

What is the nature of this relation between the object and the human?  The human appropriates the object and uses it for her ends, as a means to produce herself directly ( as an object of ``personal consumption'') or indirectly (as an object of ``productive consumption''), i.e. as a means to produce other objects that, at some point, will be an input in her own self production.  From this general viewpoint, the whole point of production is human self production, and their production as such humans means that they are producing their own productive powers.  In other words, from this general viewpoint, a society is a device by means of which individual humans to produce and reproduce their own humanity, and (since what distinguishes humans from the rest of nature is conscious activity or labor) the essence of their humanity is the productive force of their own \emph{labor}.

It will be clear from context that I use the term use value to refer both to a property of objects and to the objects themselves considered from the viewpoint of their utility.  Thus I may say that a loaf of bread \emph{has} use value or that a loaf of bread \emph{is} a use value.  (Similarly, if the loaf of bread is a commodity as a result of given social conditions, then I may say that the loaf of bread \emph{has} exchange value (and, hence, \emph{has} value) or that it \emph{is} an exchange value (and, hence, \emph{is} a value).

Commodities are exchangeable use values.  Consider now Marx's discussion of the element common to all commodities:

``Let us take two commodities, e. g., corn and iron. The proportions in which they are exchangeable, whatever those proportions may be, can always be represented by an equation in which a given quantity of corn is equated to some quantity of iron: e. g., $1$ quarter corn $= x$ cwt. iron. What does this equation tell us?  It tells us that in two different things -- in $1$ quarter of corn and $x$ cwt. of iron, there exists in equal quantities something common to both. The two things must therefore be equal to a third, which in itself is neither the one nor the other. Each of them, so far as it is exchange value, must therefore be reducible to this third.'' (p. 47)

Marx elaborates:

``A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear. In order to calculate and compare the areas of rectilinear figures, we decompose them into triangles. But the area of the triangle itself is expressed by something totally different from its visible figure, namely, by half the product of the base multiplied by the altitude. In the same way the exchange values of commodities must be capable of being expressed in terms of something common to them all, of which thing they represent a greater or less quantity.'' (p. 47)

This ``simple geometrical illustration'' sucks!  But let Marx continue:

``This common `something' cannot be either a geometrical, a chemical, or any other natural property of commodities. Such properties claim our attention only in so far as they affect the utility of those commodities, make them use values. But the exchange of commodities is evidently an act characterised by a total abstraction from use value.Then one use value is just as good as another, provided only it be present in sufficient quantity. Or, as old Barbon says,

`` [Marx quotes Barbon here:] `One sort of wares are as good as another, if the values be equal. There is no difference or distinction in things of equal value... An hundred pounds' worth of lead or iron, is of as great a value as one hundred pounds' worth of silver or gold.' 1'' (p. 47)

Marx's footnote: ``1 N. Barbon, 1. c , [p]p. 53 and 7.''

Marx continues:

``As use values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, but as exchange values they are merely different quantities, and consequently do not contain an atom of use value.'' (p. 48)

This paragraph is most unfortunate.  Marx is here drawing high and stark abstractions.  The difference between use value and value is stressed, their unity or identity is being suppressed.  However, when the mind constructs a category to denote an aspect of the world, one defines a quality and thereby, immediately, delimits its boundaries from the rest of the world, i.e. confines it quantitatively.  Its qualitative determination entails its quantitative determination.

Yes, we can contemplate use value or ``utility'' in general, and not just particular use values.  And, indeed, use value in general, utility, is a common property of all commodities, yet when we consider use value in general, by abstraction to its particular diversity, we are falling back on value as such.  Use value in general is another phrase to refer to value.  The quantitative determination of use value in general is the quantitative determination of value.

What is the general use value of production, the utility of all output regarded as a whole (or one can put it in terms of the stock of wealth)?  It is the self production of humanity.  It goes back to labor.

Marx:

``If then we leave out of consideration the use value of commodities,
they have only one common property left, that of being products of
labour. But even the product of labour itself has undergone a change
in our hands. If we make abstraction from its use value, we make abstraction
at the same time from the material elements and shapes that
make the product a use value; we see in it no longer a table, a house,
yarn, or any other useful thing. Its existence as a material thing is put
out of sight. Neither can it any longer be regarded as the product of
the labour of the joiner, the mason, the spinner, or of any other definite
kind of productive labour. Along with the useful qualities of the
products themselves, we put out of sight both the useful character of
the various kinds of labour embodied in them, and the concrete forms
of that labour; there is nothing left but what is common to them all;
all are reduced to one and the same sort of labour, human labour in
the abstract.

``Let us now consider the residue of each of these products; it consists
of the same unsubstantial reality in each, a mere congelation of
homogeneous human labour, of labour power expended without regard
to the mode of its expenditure. All that these things now tell us
is, that human labour power has been expended in their production,
that human labour is embodied in them. When looked at as crystals
of this social substance, common to them all, they are — Values. 

``We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their exchange
value manifests itself as something totally independent of
their use value. But if we abstract from their use value, there remains
their Value as defined above. Therefore, the common substance that
manifests itself in the exchange value of commodities, whenever they
are exchanged, is their value. The progress of our investigation will
show that exchange value is the only form in which the value of commodities
can manifest itself or be expressed. For the present, however,
we have to consider the nature of value independently of this, its
form.'' (p. 48)

In the mind of most Anglo readers, ``totally independent'' can only have a formal logical interpretation.  They won't remember that Marx is here looking at one side of capitalist society from a very high level of abstraction, and that a full view of the object of interest modifies this statement significantly.

Marx's punchline:

``A use value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human
labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised in it.'' (p. 48)

Almost in passing, as a sort of wrap up at the end of the section, Marx writes (with an addendum by Engels bracketed by //):

``In order to produce the latter, he must
not only produce use values, but use values for others, social use values.
//And not only for others, without more. The mediaeval peasant
produced quit-rent-corn for his feudal lord and tithe-corn for his parson.
But neither the quit-rent-corn nor the tithe-corn became commodities
by reason of the fact that they had been produced for others.
To become a commodity a product must be transferred to another,
whom it will serve as a use value, by means of an exchange.// •> Lastly
nothing can have value, without being an object of utility. If the
thing is useless, so is the labour contained in it; the labour does not
count as labour, and therefore creates no value.'' (p. 49)

Things are not just useful and useless!  There are degrees of usefulness/uselessness.  There is a continuum.  And that is what the ``neoclassical'' school has emphasized.  That is something that Marxists must appropriate, as it enriches their understanding of value.

Furthermore, framing utility as a relation or mapping between an action (consumption, personal or productive, though productive consumption falls under the ``neoclassical'' rubric of ``technology'' or ``production possibilities,'' even if in my view the latter is subsumed to the former, when the former is viewed as reproduction of human productive force) and its effect on the individual (``utility'' as a subjective state, as individual well-being, etc.) is a step in the right direction towards a deeper understanding.  The ``only'' (though substantive, conceptually speaking) alteration is that this ``subjective'' state is reframed as the self production of the individual qua productive force, and also noting that once this process is contemplated in its totality as a social process mediated by exchange, etc., then we are not talking of a subjective state any longer, but of a socially objective state.  This process of socialization, the social formation of value, is the transformation of individual subjective actions into an objective social totality that, in this historical setting, presses on the individuals as a hostile force, etc.

Marx here belies the Anglo interpretation that divorces humanity in general from a particular social historical setting.  In the Anglo view, only the latter exists.

``So far therefore as labour is a creator of use value, is useful
labour, it is a necessary condition, independent of all forms of society,
for the existence of the human race; it is an eternal natureimposed
necessity, without which there can be no material exchanges
between man and Nature, and therefore no life.'' (p. 53)

Marx:

``While, therefore, with reference to use value, the labour contained
in a commodity counts only qualitatively, with reference to value it
counts only quantitatively, and must first be reduced to human labour
pure and simple.'' (p. 55)

It seems that Marx is reserving the term ``use value'' to refer to the same thing as value, but in particular, and ``value'' to refer to the same thing as use value, but in general.  In that case, Marx is just right.

Marx:

``Commodities come into the world in the shape of use values, articles,
or goods, such as iron, linen, corn, &c. This is their plain, homely,
bodily form. They are, however, commodities, only because they are
something twofold, both objects of utility, and, at the same time, depositories
of value. They manifest themselves therefore as commodities,
or have the form of commodities, only in so far as they have two
forms, a physical or natural form, and a value form.'' (p. 57)

No, use value is not physics.  It is social in general.  It is about a relation between humans and physical objects.  It is society but regarded in general.  Value is about society regarded in a particular set of historical conditions.

Marx: 

``The mystical character of commodities does not originate, therefore,
in their use value. Just as little does it proceed from the nature of
the determining factors of value.'' (p. 82)

This is a remarkable pair of sentences.  What is the ``nature of the determining factors of value''?  Marx is here referring to the fact that the quantitative determination of value has use value tightly intertwined.  This is hinted, but not elaborated on.  It goes with the abstraction of usefulness as binary.  [Think of the binary case as the degenerate case of a richer continuum of usefulness.] If the size of ``social need'' is delimited quantitatively, then the total amount of value of a flow of a particular kind of commodities is given by that, insofar as this social need is taken as a premise.  However, Marx is looking at it from the other side: from the ``supply side,'' which is the one that highlights the specifically human character of the whole thing.  Again, consumption is something that birds do as much as humans.  Production guided by labor is something uniquely human.

Here Marx seems to suggest that a communist society may not be concerned with time economy. Wrong!  The only way not to be concerned with it is to be anally concerned with it so we save enough time to gain freedom from necessity:

``In all states of
society, the labour time that it costs to produce the means of subsistence,
must necessarily be an object of interest to mankind, though not
of equal interest in different stages of development.'' (p. 82)

Marx:

``Political economy has indeed analysed, however incompletely,1
value and its magnitude, and has discovered what lies beneath these
forms. But it has never once asked the question why labour is represented
by the value of its product and labour time by the magnitude
of that value.'' (p. 91)

So, why?  Because, historically, humans have bumped into creating conditions of fragmented production, production by private and autonomous producers, a historically delimited mode of production.

Think carefully about this footnote:

``As regards value
in general, it is the weak point of the classical school of political economy that it
nowhere, expressly and with full consciousness, distinguishes between labour, as it appears
in the value of a product and the same labour, as it appears in the use value of
that product. Of course the distinction is practically made, since this school treats labour,
at one time under its quantitative aspect, at another under its qualitative aspect.
But it has not the least idea, that when the difference between various kinds of labour is
treated as purely quantitative, their qualitative unity or equality, and therefore their
reduction to abstract human labour, is implied.'' (p. 91)

Note Marx says ``the same labour.''  So, we are talking about different ways of looking at the same thing, the same labor.

This is the 2nd footnote:

``2 It is one of the chief failings of classical economy that it has never succeeded, by means of its analysis of commodities, and, in particular, of their value, in discovering that form under which value becomes exchange value. Even Adam Smith and Ricardo, the best representatives of the school, treat the form of value as a thing of no importance, as having no connection with the inherent nature of commodities. The reason for this is not solely because their attention is entirely absorbed in the analysis of the magnitude of value. It lies deeper. The value form of the product of labour is not only the most abstract, but is also the most universal form, taken by the product in bourgeois production, and stamps that production as a particular species of social production, and thereby gives it its special historical character. If then we treat this mode of production as one eternally fixed by Nature for every state of society, we necessarily overlook that which is the differentia specified of the value form, and consequently of the commodity form, and of its further developments, money form, capital form, &c. We consequently find that economists, who are thoroughly agreed as to labour time being the measure of the magnitude of value, have the most strange and contradictory ideas of money, the perfected form of the general equivalent. This is seen in a- striking manner when they treat of banking, where the commonplace definitions of money will no longer hold water.'' (pp. 91-92)

This continues to happen. The ``neoclassical'' school is absorbed by the quantitative aspect of value.  Same as the Sraffians.

--- 

The following is from M\&E Collected Works, vol. 29.  The first few quotations are from Outlines (Grundrisse) and the latter ones (as noted) are from the Contribution (1859).

``Use value itself plays a role as an economic category. Where
precisely it does so, emerges from the development itself. E.g.
Ricardo, while believing that bourgeois political economy deals
only with exchange value and treats use value merely as exoteric,
derives precisely the most important determinations of exchange
value from use value, from their mutual relation: for instance, rent,
the minimum level of wages, and the distinction between fixed and circulating capital, to which precisely he attributes a very important
influence on the determination of prices (THROUGH THE DIFFERENT
REACTION PRODUCED UPON THEM BY A RISE OR FALL IN THE RATE OF WAGES).
Similarly in the relationship of demand and supply, etc.
The same determination appears once in the determination of
use value and then in that of exchange value, but at different
stages and with different significance. Using is consuming,
whether for production or for consumption. Exchange is this act
mediated by a social process. The using itself may be posited by,
and be a mere consequence of, exchange; on the other hand,
exchange may appear simply as a moment of using, etc. From the
standpoint of capital (in circulation), exchange appears as the
positing of its use value; while, on the other hand, its use (in the
act of production) appears as positing for exchange, as the
positing of its exchange value.
It is the same with production and consumption. In the
bourgeois economy (as in every economy) they are posited in
specific distinctions and in specific unities. The point is, precisely,
to understand this differentia specifica. Mr. Proudhon's or the social
sentimentalists' [assertion] that they are the same gets one
nowhere.3
The good thing about Ricardo's analysis is that, to begin with,
the moment is emphasised of the necessity of more rapid or slower
reproduction; that, hence, the greater or lesser perishability, the
slower or more rapid consumption (in the sense of selfconsumption),
is considered with respect to capital itself. I.e., the
relationship of use value for capital itself. (pp. 34-35)

Study the following closely.  Marx:

``The first category in which bourgeois wealth makes its
appearance is that of the commodity. The commodity itself appears
as the unity of two determinations. It is use value, i.e. an object for
the satisfaction of some system of human wants. This is its
material aspect, which can be common to the most disparate
epochs of production and lies outside the sphere of investigation
of political economy. Use value comes within that sphere as soon
as it is modified by the modern production relations or itself
exerts a modifying influence on them. What is usually said about
this in general terms, for the sake of decorum, is confined to
platitudes which had an historical value in the early beginnings of
that science, when the social forms of bourgeois production were
still being laboriously abstracted from the material and with great
effort fixed as independent objects for investigation. In fact,
however, the use value of the commodity is a given presupposition—
the material basis in which a definite economic relation
presents itself. It is only this definite relation which stamps the use
value as a commodity. E.g., wheat possesses the same use value,
whether it is grown by slaves, serfs or free labourers. It would not
lose its use value were it to fall from the sky like snow.'' (p. 252)

Definitely not platitudes.  They go to the essence of the quantitative determination of value, though as modified by the recognition that the substance of value is labor.

``The use value of the commodity is
presupposed, yet not for the owner of the commodity, but for
society in general.'' (p. 253)

So, for the owner, the value of the commodity is only as a means (exchange value) to appropriating other use values.  Thus, subjectively, for this individual, the use value of this commodity is lower than it is for the buyer.  Otherwise, there is no exchange.  Marx says that the premise of value is use value, not just in general, but use value for society.

This is the beginning of the Contribution (1859):

``The wealth of bourgeois society, at first sight, presents itself as
an immense accumulation of commodities, its unit being a single
commodity. Every commodity, however, has a twofold aspect—use
value and exchange value.*
To begin with, a commodity, in the language of the English
economists, is "anything necessary, useful or pleasant in life", an
object of human wants, a means of subsistence in the widest sense
of the term. Use value as an aspect of the commodity coincides
with the physical palpable existence of the commodity [no, it doesn't coincide; it is not physical, but social-general; and not necessarily palpable]. Wheat, for
example, is a distinct use value differing from the use values of
cotton, glass, paper, etc. A use value has value only in use, and is
realised only in the process of consumption. One and the same use
value can be used in various ways. But the extent of its possible
applications is limited by its existence as an object with distinct
properties. It is, moreover, determined not only qualitatively but
also quantitatively. Different use values have different measures
appropriate to their physical characteristics; for example, a bushel
of wheat, a quire of paper, a yard of linen, etc.'' (p. 269)

Marx continues:

``Whatever its social form may be, wealth always consists of use
values, which in the first instance are not affected by this form.
From the taste of wheat it is not possible to tell who produced it, a
Russian serf, a French peasant or an English capitalist. Although
use values serve social needs and therefore exist within the social
framework, they do not express the social relations of production. [...] Use value in this indifference to the determined economic form, i.e. use
value as such, lies outside the sphere of investigation of political
economy.* It belongs in this sphere only when it is itself a
determinate form. Use value is the immediate physical entity in
which a definite economic relationship—exchange value—is expressed.'' (p. 270)

Footnote: ``* That is why German compilers write con amore about use values, calling them
"goods". See for example the section on `goods' in L. Stein, System der
Staatswissenschaft, Bd. I. Useful information on `goods' may be found in `manuals
dealing with merchandise'.'' (p. 270)

Marx: 

``In addition to its particular use value as an individual
commodity it acquires a universal use value.'' (p. 288)

Bingo!  Value = universal use value.  In money, this happens, but only because that is latent in all commodities.  B\"ohm-Bawerk: Marx agrees with you in this, but very partially.  You don't get the essence though.

``The commodity which has
been set apart as the universal equivalent is now an object which
satisfies a universal need arising from the exchange process itself,
and has the same use value for everybody—that of being carrier
of exchange value or a universal means of exchange. Thus the
contradiction inherent in the commodity as such, namely that of
being a particular use value and simultaneously universal equivalent,
and hence a use value for everybody or a universal use value,
has been solved in the case of this one commodity.'' (p. 288)

